Ever since the advent of computer, in fact even centuries before, computing has been at the heart of research in pure mathematics for discovering and checking conjectures. Since then, the use of computers in pure mathematics has been booming, impacting all stages of the research.

OpenDreamKit will push this further by delivering a flexible toolkit enabling research groups to set up Virtual Research Environments, customised to meet the varied needs of collaborative research projects in pure mathematics and applications, and supporting the full research life-cycle from exploration, through proof and publication, to archival and sharing of data and code.

This is being achieved by building upon and contributing to the vibrant ecosystem of community developped open source software for mathematics -- in particular popular tools such as LinBox, MPIR, SageMath, GAP, Pari/GP, LMFDB, Singular, MathHub -- combined with the general purpose Jupyter interactive computing environment. Thanks to this modular approach, all developments on the latter side will impact the scientific community at large.

In its first 18 months, work has advanced on all fronts, from tuning computational mathematical software to deliver high performance on computing platforms ranging from personal laptops to HPC clusters, to exploring novel knowledge-based approaches for the tight integration of large stacks of computational and database components. Community building, training, and dissemination activities have been at the forefront, with more than 25 workshops organized or coorganized by OpenDreamKit.

By enabling research engineers to focus full time for months in a row on delicate challenges, we have tackled some of them that the communities had been facing for a decade, like porting SageMath to the Windows platform. Another immediately visible impact is that researchers now benefit from a uniform user interface, which has been used as well on the commercial Azure cloud as for teaching computer algebra at the AIMS institute in South Africa. Several VREs based on this toolkit have been deployed, including a case study used in the micromagnetics community.
